my goodness
there's so many of you
dressed so similarly hello SkillsUSA
I'm so glad let me just get this out of
the way before we get started I'm so
glad personally glad to finally be here
with you I want to thank each and every
one of you for coming from wherever you
came from to be here for clapping and
standing up and you did it y'all maybe
tear up a little bit they're really
really great to see you
secondly let me apologize for being
tardy I'm not late tonight
but about eight years ago SkillsUSA
invited me here and it's taken that long
for me to actually get around to it I
was just backstage now talking to some
of the other guys in the red coats
trying to figure out why it took so long
for this to happen and I I started to
make some notes I normally don't use
notes at all but these excuses are valid
and I just want to get this out of the
way dirty jobs went on the air back in
2003 and sometime in 2004 the people
that run this organization must have
seen that's very sweet
the people who run this organization
called and said hey would you would you
come and speak at our national
convention I said you know I'd love to
let me let me check the Dirty Jobs
calendar and as luck would have it I had
a previous engagement in Nevada anybody
here from Nevada well what a crazy
coincidence any of you know Bob combs
the pig farmer outside of Las Vegas this
guy in 2005 I would have been here but I
had to go to Las Vegas Nevada to meet a
guy named Bob and what Bob does is he
changes look at me walking on my water
that's very unprofessional what Bob does
is he collects all the uneaten food from
the casinos and he brings it back to his
pig farm and in his backyard he built
this giant contraption and in it he
reduces the uneaten people food into
this giant bowl of soup that he feeds to
his pigs now his pigs grow at twice the
normal rate he gets him to market twice
as fast as they normally would plus he
takes care of Las Vegas is recycling it
smells so bad I can't even describe it
but the reason I wasn't here in 2005 is
because I was with a guy named Bob and I
smelled like a pig next year when
SkillsUSA called I said look I'm going
to be there just let me check and as it
turns out I I had a date in Ohio
but this just wasn't any date this this
was with a woman named Kristen Stanford
I don't know if any of you saw this
episode but in Ohio they do this snake
research at a place called put-in-bay
right and what Kristen does for a living
is is kind of fascinating she she
captures Lake Erie water snakes and she
takes him back to her lab and then he
makes him she makes him vomit and the
way you make a snake vomit is you
squeeze it like a tube of toothpaste
right and the stuff that comes out of
the snake's mouth
well she analyzes it cause she's a
scientist and she determines whether or
not the snakes are still on the verge of
being endangered based on their dietary
patterns so the reason I wasn't here in
2006 was because I was covered with
snake vomit with a girl named Kristen in
Ohio next year next year I was sure I
was going to be here it was 2007 I
looked at the calendar and I was
optimistic because it turns out Dirty
Jobs is gonna be in Kansas anybody here
from Kansas by any chance oh that's nice
anybody ever been to Hutchinson Kansas
there's a salt mine in Hutchinson Kansas
runs from here all the way up toward the
Great Lakes I spent a week in there one
day back in back in whatever it was
dirty jobs very very big big on farming
big on mining we've been in gold mines
copper mines been in bass salt mines
coal mines bituminous and anthracite but
in that particular day I was in a salt
mine and I learned more than I ever
wanted to know about about salt you know
once upon a time salt was more valuable
than gold anybody know that that's true
it's the kind of worthless stuff you
accumulate in your brain when you work
for the Discovery Channel but you know
back in the day they didn't have
electricity they couldn't make ice salt
was the thing that made civilization
possible so I felt very good about being
in a mine but unfortunately it kept me
from being with you way back in 2007 but
in 2008 man I was sure I was going to
make it but then I got a call from
Michigan is there anybody from Michigan
where'd you get those cool lights
fantastic
they don't have lights like that on the
Mackinac Bridge but that's where I went
on that particular year and I spent I
spent that day high high above the
Straits of Mackinac painting the
Mackinac Bridge green now it's a green
bridge obviously but the thing is you
never stop painting it they painted
year-round 365 days a year and I walked
all the way up the cable on the outside
of the bridge just to change the light
bulb at the very top and to make a long
story short it was higher than I'd ever
been at any given time and something may
it torn loose down here and I made it I
just made a terrible mess in my own
wardrobe and I I couldn't be here with
you then because I put my pants to be
honestly you think I'm kidding it
happened all the time on dirty jobs
it just happened right now a little bit
I'm kidding it almost never have scary
as it was up there though on the
Mackinac Bridge next year I was sure I
was going to be here in fact I think I
might have even committed but then
things come up in TV and I had to go to
Hawaii there's got to be somebody from
Hawaii you see the episode where we were
washing windows in Hawaii this is what
I'm probably one of the most popular
dirty jobs ever because once again the
viewers got to see me squeal real high
like a 10-pound baby girl trade from my
life my friend Dino washed his windows
over there and it's the only state in
the Union where you can wash windows the
old-fashioned way you sit on a you sit
on a 2x4
Calma bosons chair right they don't use
scaffolding and you rappel down the
sides of these buildings with a squeegee
in one hand and a rosary in the other
and you just
you wash windows and you just hope
everything works the way it was supposed
to work well more or less it did my
cameraman got his hair caught in one of
the repellers and nearly scalped him but
he's okay now I couldn't be here back in
2009 because I was in the emergency room
with my cameraman in Hawaii anyhow you
get the idea in 2010 it was Nebraska
who's in Nebraska I was so sure I was
going to get here in 2010 but we finally
had a job come through that I'd been
wanting to do for years it's a simple
job but it was asphalt paving and I
always wanted to do this job because
it's such an important part of keeping
our infrastructure together but of
course we wound up outside some little
town in Nebraska I don't even know if
it's on a map but we spent the day in
110 degree heat building a road my
cameraman passed out from the heat that
my sound guy passed out eventually I
passed out in the asphalt so I couldn't
be here in 2010 because I was passed out
but in 2011 this was a heartbreaker
because we very we almost booked our
tickets to be here but I wound up in
North Dakota anybody in North Dakota
North Dakota just happened to be the
very last dirty job we did in that in
the US and we were up in Dickinson and
here's a crazy thing about Dickinson
North Dakota
you know what the unemployment rate is
and Dickinson right now it's like it's
like negative five percent more people
work in Dickinson than live in Dickinson
they come from all over their work in
the natural gas they're doing all kinds
of things anyway I went up there to put
up a cell phone tower and you guys know
how it is up on the high plains one
minute the sun's out you're up there
with your TV crew you're shooting a show
again you're 400 feet in the air in the
next minute you're in the middle of some
all the clouds are the lightning is
everywhere anyhow I I couldn't be here
in 2011 cuz I was getting electrocuted
in Dickinson North Dakota last year I
was very optimistic but then somebody at
the network had a brilliant idea they
said hey what would what would dirty
jobs look like if you just went to
another country I said it'd look a lot
like it looks here only further away
really but they said no you should go to
Australia so ice alright I'll go to
Australia nobody's here from Australia
but that's where I was this month last
year I was in an opal mine in Coober
Pedy Australia this is a town you
couldn't find on a map but that's where
they mine all the opals in the world in
the middle of the outback and it's a
pretty exciting job and for me one more
opportunity to go headfirst into a long
skinny hole I didn't want to be in the
first place but that happened this year
finally Dirty Jobs has run its course we
did 300 we've been all 50 states which
brings me here in front of you
if only I had something to say actually
I've got quite a bit to say but I know
it's a long evening and I'm not going to
take a ton of time but I was standing
backstage listening to everybody who
spoke and so many things struck me it
really is a struggle to know exactly how
to address a crowd like this because
unlike so much of the country you guys
get it you guys already get it and for
years now and for years to come I'll be
out there with the same basic message
and that simple message is all those
jobs I just mentioned all the people
that I met from the guys who work on the
bridges to the guys who mined the salt
to the pig farmers to the window washers
you know they're doing pretty well the
pig farmer in Vegas after that dirty
jobs segment aired was offered 75
million dollars for his operation
he's a tradesman he built that thing in
his backyard the show got some publicity
and people wanted to buy it mostly they
wanted to buy it because his pigs make
Vegas smell funny but the point is that
man's a success that guy who washed his
windows in Hawaii
Dino he was homeless 12 years ago he was
washing windows for food today he has 50
employees and a contract for every
high-rise on the main island
he's a tradesman the people I work with
on dirty jobs
year after year after year always seem
to do better than people think they're
continually surprised when I tell
stories and I've got 300 of them I'm not
going to tell them all to you in fact
I'm not going to tell you any more about
the show what I want to suggest is
what's on my chest
it says profoundly disconnected and if I
were to really sum up people ask me all
the time would you learn really Mike
what did you learn
300 dirty jobs and what I learned is
that
well let me say like this the CEO of
snap-on put it pretty well this is the
greatest country on the face of the
earth there's no doubt about it's not
even close I'm biased I admit it but
I'll tell you we've got some challenges
and we have a problem and the problem
isn't in this room the problem is in the
way a big chunk of the country thinks
about the definition of a good job this
is tricky
all right I'm going to take a minute and
talk about it because I'm not an expert
on any of this I just know what I've
seen over the last eight or nine years
and every state that I mentioned and the
42 that I didn't people tell me the same
thing again and again they talk about
how hard it is to find people who are
willing to a learn a skill be master the
skill and see work their butts off it's
hard to find you guys I was in an
airport I'm always in an airport but
this happened about two years ago walked
off the plane he's walking down the
jetway guy came up to me dressed in a
maintenance uniform he was doing
something under the plane but he came on
he said hey Mike I just got to stop you
I just want to tell you that wife and I
loved the show and we watched it with
our kids every Tuesday night and it's
really cool because we get to say to
them see all the people that do all the
different things that make our
civilization work how cool is that
that's very gratifying and I said thanks
a lot I'm glad you watch and about
halfway through the food court out in
front of a Sbarro some other guy comes
up to me that same age the first guy
he's wearing a three-piece suit
he looks prosperous he says hey Mike and
I say yeah and he says this want to tell
you love dirty jobs watch it with my
wife and our kids every Tuesday I said
oh good I'm glad to hear that he said
it's so much fun you know the people are
interesting but it's it's not
to be able to say to our kids see what
happens if you don't go to college
now being a gentleman with impeccable
manners I didn't bother to point out
that he was his schmuck in fact
what I did was what I did was I thanked
him for watching my show because shows
like Dirty Jobs simply reflect the thing
that most viewers already believe it's
virtually impossible to change
somebody's mind with a TV show it's
impossible to change their mind with a
30-second commercial so how do you
change this guy's mind how did this guy
start to think the way he thinks and how
is it that we've wound up with a country
divided over the definition of a good
job
look people talk about the differences
between conservatives liberals Democrats
and Republicans and red states and blue
states and whatever I see the difference
in this country between those two people
the first guy who looked at a show like
Dirty Jobs and saw a reflection of what
matters to him and the second guy who
saw it the way he saw so the way I see
it is we need to have a conversation a
big grown-up conversation and I'll tell
you why you guys probably know a lot of
this everybody knows unemployment's high
right you guys read the headlines you're
smart people you know about the skills
gap too right it's getting wider there's
three million jobs available right now
there are 12 million people out of work
and another 8 million people who aren't
looking anymore and yet 3 million great
jobs are available what's going on with
that I was in Vegas again a couple
months ago I loved it you guys in
listening that's fantastic I ran into a
woman who runs the local Caterpillar
dealer down there
we had an amazing conversation I told
her what I was up to and she said Mikey
you can't imagine we have over 20
positions available right now in heavy
equipment repair all right some of these
jobs start you know 40 50 60 grand and
with a couple years of experience in the
right training and certification which
by the way they'll give you for free you
can be making six figures they can't
fill the jobs
they can't fill them I hear this story
not just from Caterpillar
but companies all over the country are
struggling to find people who are
willing to learn a skill be really great
at and work their butts off and I've
been walking around trying to figure out
how that happened how did so many people
in our country become profoundly
disconnected and I started to have this
conversation with my buddies at cat and
I'm going to tell you a very quick story
because look the only stories that
really matter are the ones that happen
to you and you specifically this
happened to me before most of you guys
were born back when I was a senior in
Baltimore Maryland in 1900
sama name-dropper sue me
represent all right
I like it
all right
in Baltimore's a rowdy town there's no
doubt about it
I was just a kid I was 17 and I was
summoned to my guidance counselor's
office
mr. Dunbar was his name mr. Dunbar
wanted to have a conversation with me
about my future and he began to
encourage me in a pretty persuasive way
to go get a four-year degree now I got
nothing against a four-year degree
truth is I eventually got one but at the
time I had some problems first of all I
didn't have any money
secondly I didn't know what I wanted to
do and I was very honest with mr. Dunbar
and I said based on the above criteria
visa vie my lack of funds and my
complete and total ambiguity I think
it's best for me to go to a two-year
school a Community College he said Mike
he said Mike that is so below your
potential you don't want to do that you
want to get your degree and then the
world will open up for you and I looked
at him and he looked at me and then he
pointed over his shoulder it's something
I'm going to show you right now he
pointed at a poster that he had hanging
over his desk and this is what that
poster was take a look at it
we'll put it up on the screen if he
can't see it but give it a good look
here's a guy holding a degree and here's
a guy holding a wrench and my guidance
counselor says to me which one of these
guys do you want to be now this is 1979
and then of course the caption and I
have a caption really jumps out how's
that for a bit of genius work smart not
hard this was part of a college campaign
back in 1979 and some of you have heard
that expression in fact just by a quick
round of applause who's heard work smart
not hard before right
now that was kind of a trick I just did
I don't I don't want you to applaud the
sentiment I just wanted to know it's not
just me later on when you're bored not
now but Google work smart not hard
you'll see hundreds of pages it's become
the title of books it's become the title
of efficiency seminars whatever that
means
it's on schwag it's on book bags I got a
theory I think that work smart not hard
is more than a platitude I think it's
more than a stupid cliche I think it's
the worst advice in the world and I
think I think we took it as a country I
think the country's full of people right
now who actually believes they can find
success by working smart instead of
working hard now 1979 college needed a
PR campaign and this was a part of
posters like that were hanging all over
high schools all over the country it
worked
College enrollments went through the
roof and did so for the next 30 or 40
years but some interesting things
happened along the way vocational
education classes yeah right when I was
in high school auto shop wood shop metal
shop they were in every high school
they're not anymore guys you know that
you have replaced vocational education
skills USA has essentially become the
connective tissue because as a society
we stopped valuing what else happens
well the years go by people line up to
get into college because hey it's the
best it's the best way to succeed right
all you need is your four-year degree
and everything is going to fall into
place did that really happen
I don't know right now there are a lot
of people who have a four-year degree
who can't find a job millions more have
a four-year degree and are working in a
field that had nothing to do with what
they study but worst of all you've got a
lot of people who paid a lot of money
for a four-year degree who went into
debt we have a trillion dollars of
student loans on the books right now
we're loaning money that we don't have
to kids will never be able to pay it
back in order to educate them for a job
that no longer exists you know what that
is that is profoundly disconnected say
with me profoundly disconnected so I
talked to my buddies in caterpillar
about this and they say you know
something ought to be done
we got a we're doing what we can other
companies are doing what they can
so here's what I can do you know I'm a
fan you know I love you guys you know
you know that you get it and so many
others don't so rather than tell you how
fantastic you are and rather than
congratulate you for all that you've
done and all that you're going to do I
decided to come here today to ask for
your help I'm not going to blow any more
sunshine up your red jackets okay
I'm gonna ask you to help me do
something when I ask you to help me
change the worst advice in the world to
something not so stupid something that
looks like this now
that's me by the way in the cap and gown
and standing next to me is what I'll
call a much more aspirational figure
this guy he doesn't have any student
loans this guy has a job this guy likes
what he does this guy went through
SkillsUSA and some kind of vocational
training class and he got it this guy
well he's educated he's just not skilled
he's educated he's just not trained he
doesn't know what to do he is confused
by the industrial setting in which he
finds himself
this guy gets I really wonder what would
happen if guidance counselor's like mr.
Dunbar had a poster that said work smart
and hard so this is a poster I created
it with my buddies at cat the old
posters down here in the lower left-hand
corner and a very brief explanation of
why I think it's the worst advice in the
world so now we've got this poster what
are we going to do with it I say we hang
it up I say we hang it every
I say I say that you guys look you guys
are going to make a difference in your
own life you're already present for that
you're going to make a difference in
your family's life
you get it but I'm telling you the
second guy I described to you in that
airport he's out there she's out there
millions and millions of Americans are
out there and they don't understand the
value that you bring to the table they
don't understand the importance of the
jobs that I featured on my show for nine
years
they are profoundly disconnected from a
couple of fundamental truths I don't
think I can close the skills gap I don't
know if we can all do it but I do know
it'll never ever happen unless we change
the fundamental conversation that's
going on right now to help me do that
caterpillar and I came out with a new
website surprise surprise it's called
profoundly disconnected if you go there
you can get one of these posters and if
you do and if you're feeling brave I
dare you I double dog dare you get it
back to your high school hang it up in a
hallway find a teacher who understands
let them put it in their classroom find
a guidance counselor let them hang it up
take a picture of it and send it back to
me and we'll make a collection of some
advice that actually makes sense maybe a
couple years from now people will Google
work smart and hard and go up that's
where that started not only do you guys
get it not only do you have the talent
not only do you have the will to make
sure yourselves and for your families
but I'm calling on you to go further go
out into the world be an ambassador for
work
spread the kind of advice that actually
matters it makes a difference
have fun at what you do this is the
greatest country in the world but I'm
not biased at all when I tell you it's
because of you guys
you